and sitting in Dick Hervey's study, getting ready
to chat with him about his years here in College
Station with former students and helping A&M in
many, many ways.
Let's see. To begin with, in case someone was
looking at this and didn't know who you were, would
you give a brief biographical review before you
came back to A&M after the war? before I came back
after the war. I enrolled at A&M in 1938. Grew up
where? Grew up in Rainbow, Texas. Graduated in
high school, class of 38. Came to A&M in the fall of
38 and graduated in the spring of 42 with a degree in
marketing and finance. Was in the M3 ROTC
Transferred into the Air Force before
graduating. Went into the Air Force the day after I
got my degree from A&M, which was May 7th, 16th,
1942. Went into the Air Force for four years. Came
out of the service in January of 46. And came to A&M
as Executive Secretary of the Association of
Foreign Students. On October the 1st, 1947. Now,
how did they and you link up at that point? I was a
very good friend of E. E. McQuillan, who was the
executive director of the association during my
days in A&M. And he decided that he'd move over with
the university as director of development. And
when he did that, the position of executive
director of the association became open. I was on
his executive board at the time, the youngest
member of his board. And he called me and asked if I
wanted to apply for the position, and I said yes.
And I did apply for the position and was given the
job. And so you began, what was the- I began October
the 1st, 1947. Describe the association staff and
so forth at that time. At that time, there were
about 10 people on the staff of the association. We
had 40,000 addresses of graduates and former
students. We had a bookkeeper, the director. The
bookkeeper was Mr. Lonnie Locke. We had a
secretary to the executive director. That was
Marie Kalanick. We had Ms. Woody Mae Shepherd, who
was head of the class reunions and class programs.
We had Doris Wren, who worked on records. And in the
mailroom, we had Ms. Helen Price, who is now the
wife former dean of the School of Veterinary
Medicine, worked in records. And we had a little
student wife named Higgins, whose husband had
played in on the football team. And that was about
it. Where were we? We were located in the
administration building at the east gate. As you
go up the steps to the back, the first floor, turn
around right to the right, and the first doors on
the right was the Former Students Association. We
had two offices, one big central office, my
office, and then we had a mailroom office down the
hall. That was the size of it. And it was officially
entitled the same as it is now? The Association of
Former Students, which was named about Woolen
became executive secretary in 1926, and they had a
reorganization of the association, and they
named it that at that time, in the late 20s. You
mentioned 40,000 names. Computers weren't
around then. No. How did y'all have those
available? Our records were all on the
dressograph plates. which I guess was the
forerunner of a computer car. And we had it so set
that we could tab it for a contribution or a
non-contribution. We had the class numeral on it.
We had the major course of study, got the degree in
veterinary medicine or agriculture or whatever.
And we were doing the best we could with what we had.
And you had also, I presume, some geographic. So if
I wanted everybody from the Dallas area. They were
organized geographically. Geographically and
by class. So we could pull out cities or counties or
states or whatever. And so that's 1947. And the
president at that time of A&M. The president, when
I went there with Mr. Gibb Gilchrist, we had no
chancellor's system. Describe him. Mr.
Gilchrist
was an engineer, graduated the University of
Texas in 1909, was a state highway engineer prior
to his coming here, and in the mid-30s he was
brought here as Dean of Engineering. He was a very
fine, tough administrator. He was a very good man,
though there are a lot of people that might
disagree with me a little bit. He was an
outstanding college administrator. And
conducted a real, ran a real good show here as long
as he was president and then continued as
chancellor. The chancellorship organization
was his idea. And the chancellor system was put
into effect in 1948.
And Mr. Gilchrist became the first chancellor of
the A&M system. And when he became chancellor in
1948, the longtime dean of Bolton, we called him
Bear Tracks, became president. the Gilchrist
lived in the old, to you and me, President's House
over near Sabeasa? Yes, yes. All right, and then
when the chancellorship was created, the White
House down near the core area? Yes. Okay. Moved
into what, what did we call that house? I forgot,
but Anyway, when he became Chancellor, he moved in
that White House.
Mr. Bolton, I don't recall if Mr. Bolton ever moved
in the old, what's called, President's Home. I
guess he did. As president, Gilchrist office, his
office was in the, what you and I used to call the
system administration building facing east.
Yes, in the system building. And he remained, his
office remained there as chancellor. Yes. Where
did President Bolton's office? President
Bolton, when was the Koch building built? I don't
know. Richard Koch building.
I'm trying to think of a
minute. I, as I remember now, I'd have to go back to
the date of the, I'll check that in a minute, when
the coat building was built.
I'm going to say that Dean Bolton was in the coat
building provided that building was at that time
built. This, remember, was 1948 to 1950. There was
no Memorial Student Center, and I have a feeling
there was no boat building at that time. Mr.
Bolton's office
would have been in one of the engineering
buildings as dean of engineering. And he may have
stayed in that building for a while as president.
Describe, in the late 40s, describe the campus
physically. What buildings were where? The
campus in 1947 to 1950, its parameter was the
Administration building, we called it, on the
east gate. And the west gate was the railroad
station. And to the south was Old Jersey Street.
And to the north gate was the North Gate. And
anything to the west of the campus was very rural.
few residential areas on the south side of the
campus. The north side of the campus was the old
North Gate, which was the business section of
College Station at the time. The East Gate was a few
residences built there in the late 30s and not much
more. A few apartments had been moved in from old
air bases and army bases and converted to branch
student housing. And they were called College
View. And it was on the area where they now have new
student apartments. And we were in very short
supply of branch student housing because most of
the veterans, a lot of the veterans, came back
after the war, 46, 47, 48, were married, needed
housing. They converted all the old project
houses, which were located on the south side, into
apartments. And they had four apartments in each
of those buildings, so they provided some
housing. Were there any trailers? Yes, there were
trailers. All around the old project houses where
students lived. Where athletic facilities are
now. Where athletic facilities are now, yes. Who
were some of the leading personalities on the
campus at that time? Leading personalities.
Well, of course,
Spike White. and his bunch of student activities
were very active. Mr. Penberg was, or was named,
Dean of England. He was active. Then in the core,
what little core we had in those days was much more
than it is now because it was still ushered for
incoming students. was Colonel Stan Malloy, who
was a commandant. Joe Davis, who was a major,
worked for Colonel Malloy. And then there were
attack officers like Taylor Wilkins, Charles
Taylor,
Howard Perry,
Roy Buchek at one time. And many people of that
nature had been in the service and came out and were
employed as track officers. The football team was
coached by Coach Homer Norton, whose contract was
bought up after the A&M Rice football game in the
fall of 1947. I can tell you about that if you're
interested. Oh,
yes. When our better football players went into
the service in 1941, 42, 43, Coach Norton promised
those boys that went into the service a
scholarship, athletic scholarship when they
came back. Well, when the war was over, most of
those young men had not gotten a degree. So they
came back to Indiana and they wanted their
athletic scholarship and Coach Norton gave them
the scholarship. And they attempted to play
football, but they weren't as good athletically
as they had been before the war. But Coach Norton,
for his credit, honored his work and gave every one
of those players, former players, and their
scholarships. As a result, he was limited as to the
number of new scholarships he could afford. As a
result, he was not
able to win the games with the alumni and others
that perhaps thought that he should win. In the
fall of 47, which was my first year back, we were
having trouble winning games. and using a lot of
those old veterans. So
the alumni started becoming unrestful about it.
We made rice in Houston that fall. And as I recall,
the store was something like 37 to 12, 37 to 14,
something like that. It was a one-sided story in
favor of Bryce. After the game, my wife and I and
Quillen and his wife went to a cocktail party in
Houston, and present were some of the staunch Big
Aggies like T.F. Smith, T.W. Moley, Jake Hamlin,
George G. Smith, and there was a rumble at that
party that night about Norton and his head
coaching position. This was a Saturday night
afternoon. The following Monday, the Houston A&M
Club met every Monday at noon at the Rice Hotel. And
at that meeting, there was a rumble about buying up
Coach Norton's contract. As I recall, he had about
$20,000 of contract left. That, I think,
represented two years of coaching, about $10,000
a year. So at that meeting,
there was a motion to start the ball rolling to buy
up those gardens contracts without any clearance
from the university or anybody else. That's just
the way that things happened in those days. Well,
anyway, Mr. Travis Smith, who was class of 98,
stood up and said, if you boys are serious about
this matter, I'll match you dollar for dollar.
Every dollar you can raise here, I'll just match.
As a result, the ball got to Roland. And Mr. Smith
did honor his situation. Whatever was raised at
that meeting, I don't remember the figure, but it
was not $20,000, more like $4,000 or $5,000 raised
by the membership of the club, matched by Mr.
Smith's money, and then the rest was raised by
Dallas and Fort Worth and Beaumont. And that's the
way the matter was raised, where they paid for his
contract and they gave him his money and paid him
off. And Mr. Norton took it very well, though he was
disappointed of course, but he did accept the
money and resigned his position and went to
Galveston, Texas and bought a a motel in
Galveston. And Harry Styler had been brought here
as an assistant to Coach Martin. And the Athletic
Council, then after that happened, named Coach
Harry Styler as head football coach. As far as you
know, was there any effort by the campus
administration to prevent, to stop this or
anything? Not that I heard of it. Not that I know of.
And the then called Board of Directors, now
Regents, they were not involved particularly.
They were not involved particularly, nor was the
administration who had been Mr. Gibb and Gail
Christie. Now we did have an athletic director at
that time who was Mr. Carmichael, Bill
Carmichael.
Mr. Carmichael had an athletic council, as they do
now. And after all this happened, Mr. Norton's
contract was paid up. Then the athletic council
sat down and decided they were going to employ as a
head coach. And they employed Harry Steinway, who
was here to be our head coach. And that was
his first season would have been. the year 48, and
he posted 48, 49, and 50. And then you'll remember
the problems that Coach Tyler got into, and he was
terminated then. His position here was
terminated sometime in the year, early in the year
51.
And I'll tell you that story. Go ahead, yes, go
ahead. It
was customary for the Houston A&M Club to have a
banquet each year for the football team and their
girlfriends and all the coaches, and that was held
in the Shamrock Hotel, which was pretty new, just
having opened in 1949. Well, the year 19 would have
been the banquet for the team of 1950. The banquet
was held, I think, in January of the year 51. Coach
Stiler had been in Dallas for a meeting, and he was
to fly from Dallas to Houston. Mr. Ford Munderland
was on the plane. Mr. Munderland was an executive
with the American General Life Insurance
Company. Had been a professor here at A&M. They
flew together. same plane from Dallas to Houston
airport. Upon arrival at Houston airport, Ford
invited Harry to ride with him to the Shamrock
Hotel.
But when they arrived and got off the airplane,
somebody was there to meet Harry Steiner. And this
person that was meeting Harry insisted that Harry
go with him to ride to the Shamrock Hotel. So he did,
and Mr. Munden went by himself to the Shamrock
Hotel. The banquet was delayed and delayed and
delayed. They wouldn't start, they wouldn't
start, they wouldn't start. Finally, word
started around that Coach Tyler had been
assaulted.
Rumor had it that Well, all kinds of groups, of all
sorts of descriptions. But it later developed
that Coach Steiner had been seen on the side of the
wife of this ex-woman
and this young lady that worked at
the athletic department. husband just
thoroughly gave Coach Snyder a good beating. And
then put him in the car and took him to Shamrock and
let him out there in the garage. And Harry went to
the garage and went into the restroom and went to
the telephone and called the trainer, Bill
Dayton. Bill Dayton came to the garage and tried to
fix Harry up and pretty badly beat him. And then
took him to a motel, I don't know what it's called,
it was out on the water drive, Buck Road, Buck Road
Motel, Buck Road Inn, I don't know, around that
area. And this is a real
long story, but to make it brief, when all this
happened, Mr. D.W. Williams was actually the
president. Mr. Williams investigated the case
and Coach Steidler denied knowing who assaulted
him and would not admit knowing anything about who
this person was. Mr. Williams, as I understood,
had an agreement with Steidler that if anything
ever came out that he did know the person
who saw it, then
the administration would have had his immediate
resignation. Well, this, what happened, one of
the Houston newspapers, I don't believe it's in
existence now, but one of the Houston newspapers
put an investigative reporter on the case and
found out the whole story. And they called Coach
Stider to Houston. said,
apologize, but we're running this story the next
day. But he could do nothing but apologize. And it
was run on pay to get an apology. His daughter came
back to campus and went to Mr. Williams' office and
told him the whole story. And that was the end of the
story. And it was very unfortunate, but it And then
he's followed by... Coach Styler had brought in an
outstanding guy from California. He was the most
lovable person that you could ever imagine. Was
Harry's line coach. And his name was Ray
George. Ray George was named head coach. coached
the 51, 52, and 53. And
he was just such a nice guy that he just wasn't tough
enough to be a head coach. And he, that year, 51, he
beat Texas here on Powell Hill, 42-21 in the great
game. And by that time, Dr. Harrington was
president
and they declared a holiday after that victory. So
then it was Ray George who served through the year
1953 and there was unrest with Ray's ability to
coach and so forth. So they terminated Ray,
and they had a big search
for a replacement for Ray, which was a rather
unfortunate experience, I think that's what
happened. Maybe that was after Bear Bryant left in
57. But anyway, they employed him. Dr. Harrington
and Mr. W.T. Daugherty was, I think, the president
of the board of directors then, persuaded Coach
Bryant to meet him in Dallas in a hotel room. And
they offered him the job as athletic director and
head coach at Andy in 54. Never discussed salary or
anything. He took the job on a handshake and came to
A&M as athletic director
and head coach. And you'll remember that great
history that Bear Bryant had here. What was he like
to work with for a person in your position?
Bear Bryant was not easy to work with. He was a
little bit difficult to work with. I did work with
Bear, but Bear had to be told if he was going to do
something that we were not accustomed to doing, he
would have to be told we don't do that and tell him
why. And once he understood why you didn't want to
do something that he wanted to do, and he
understood why we didn't, then he went along with
it. But he was not a real easy person to deal with,
because he had his own ideas of how he wanted things
done. And he came here without knowing much about
the traditions of A&M, the real traditions of A&M.
He knew athletics, and he knew it well. He'd been in
Maryland, he'd been in Kentucky, and I assume
Alabama, and he knew how they did things, which
were not exactly like we did. For example, he
wanted to have a big homecoming. And he talked to me
about having a big homecoming. And I said, Barron,
we consider every home game a homecoming. And we
have class reunions and so forth on every home
game. We don't want homecomings. We won't ever get
him to be a homecoming. But all right, if that's the
way it is. And he went along with that. But
Bear was a loner. He didn't come in here with a big
band and a big ball of rock. He came in here to do one
job, have a good football game. And that was his
mission. That was his purpose. And he worked night
and day. He worked hard. He was an outstanding
recruiter, but he didn't want anybody's advice
how to do it. He knew how to do it. And he stayed with
his program. He recruited players that he could
win with. And he would go to A&M meetings, but he
would not let any alumni affairs interfere with
his main primary job, coaching the football team.
Now did he ask you and the former student
leadership to do anything for him? Yes. Yes, he
did. As a matter of fact, when we were put on
probation,
would have been in 54 or 55. Our association of
former student council was in session. And he
asked if he could appear before the group,
and he said certainly, come right here. And his
opening statement was, when the going gets tough
and tough, and he outlined the probation